Object Class: Armageddon

Special Containment Procedures:

Due to the nature of SCP-XXXX, containment is not possible at this time. All efforts are to be focused on minimizing the potential impact of SCP-XXXX on the global population.

SCP-XXXX is a celestial object on a collision course with Earth, estimated to impact in approximately ██ years. The object is approximately ██ kilometers in diameter and is composed of unknown materials. Initial attempts to deflect or destroy SCP-XXXX have proven ineffective.

Any information regarding SCP-XXXX is to be kept highly classified and strictly monitored. The Foundation is to maintain a network of telescopes and sensors focused on SCP-XXXX at all times, in order to track its movements and monitor potential developments.

Any potential methods of mitigating the effects of SCP-XXXX are to be immediately researched and implemented. A task force composed of Foundation personnel, international organizations, and government agencies has been established for this purpose.

Description:

SCP-XXXX was first discovered by Foundation telescopes in 19██. Initial analysis indicated that it was on a collision course with Earth, with a high degree of certainty. Further analysis has confirmed that there is no known way to alter its trajectory or disintegrate it.

SCP-XXXX has been observed to have a gravitational field and a faint atmosphere, indicating that it may be a rogue planet or a large comet. Attempts to gather more information by sending probes have been unsuccessful, as SCP-XXXX has proven to be highly resistant to all forms of intervention.

The Foundation has established a protocol for emergency evacuation and relocation of key personnel in the event of an impact. However, the potential devastation caused by SCP-XXXX is beyond any current contingency plans.

Additional Notes:

The Foundation is currently working on a plan to evacuate key personnel and valuable information to remote locations in the event of an impact. However, the possibility of survival for the global population is extremely low. It is recommended that all efforts be focused on minimizing the impact and preparing for the potential end of human civilization.