SCP-XXXX is to be contained in a standard safe-class locker at Site-17.

Object Class: Euclid

Special Containment Procedures: SCP-XXXX is to be kept in a standard safe-class locker at Site-17. Access to SCP-XXXX is restricted to Level 3 personnel or higher. Any experiments involving SCP-XXXX must be approved by at least two Level 4 personnel.

Description: SCP-XXXX is a glitch in the coding of certain ATM machines that allows for the generation of an infinite amount of money. When accessed, the ATM will dispense a random amount of money, ranging from $10 to $100,000. The amount of money dispensed will then immediately be added to the account associated with the ATM card used to access SCP-XXXX.

Attempts to trace the source of the funds have been unsuccessful. The funds do not appear to be coming from any known bank or financial institution, and do not seem to be linked to any particular account. Despite this, the funds are completely legitimate and can be used without issue.

SCP-XXXX was first discovered when reports of ATMs dispensing large amounts of money without any apparent reason began to surface. Foundation agents were able to locate the affected ATM machines and contain them, along with the individuals who had discovered the glitch.

As of yet, the cause of SCP-XXXX is unknown. Research is ongoing to determine the source of the glitch and how it can be neutralized. In the meantime, SCP-XXXX is to be contained and monitored to prevent potential abuse.

Addendum XXXX-1: On ██/██/20██, an individual who had discovered SCP-XXXX attempted to use it to become rich. The individual withdrew a large amount of money from an SCP-XXXX-affected ATM, but was apprehended by Foundation agents before they could make use of the funds. The individual is currently in Foundation custody for questioning.

Addendum XXXX-2: On ██/██/20██, a team of Foundation researchers successfully traced the source of the funds generated by SCP-XXXX. It was determined that the funds were being generated by a highly advanced and complex computer program, located in an unknown location. The program appears to have the ability to generate and manipulate vast amounts of money at will. Further research is ongoing to determine the purpose and origins of the program.