The Vaccinator
~ Returned prior generic resistance uber and passive buffs
~ Fixed blocking capture and uber rate
+ Increased damage resistance to +25% for x1 uber, 45% for x2, 60% for x3
- Reduced critical damage resistance to 75%
Re-introducing the original design proved to show that it was simply not a good design. The rework was reimplemented, with a slightly faster rate and slightly higher resistance especially when stacked. To offset this, critical resistance was weakened as well.

Natascha
+ Changed Health-on-hit to scale based on distance instead of damage
+ Health returned is visible now
~ Health-on-hit ranges between 8 at most or 4 at least
The damage penalty and rate at which damage dropped off at mid range made the health returned seem far too difficult to gain. This version only starts to lose health past medium range, making it more effective for gaining health more often. The max health gained was reduced accordingly.

Spy
+ Increased base cloak duration to 12s
+ Reverted base time to decloak to 2s
- Increased base time to cloak to 2s
This should make escape slightly more challenging for the increased max health, but allow for the spy's approach to be fairer.

Sappers
+ Radar range increased to 640 Hu
- You are highlighted as well by the radar
The radar is made slightly larger to be more effective, but the risk of activating it is now more tangible. If you're disguised it shouldn't automatically single you out, but does limit the candidates for spy-checking.

The Enforcer
+ Removed time to cloak penalty
- Reduced damage resistance while disguised to 20%
- Disguise resistance does not stack with cloak resistance
- Increased time to decloak penalty to +1s
Disguise resistance stacked with the cloak resistance and health buff was far too intense, therefore needed to be reined in. Additionally with cloak changes, it no longer slows time to cloak but just decloak time to be consistent among all watches and make approach require more consideration.

Conniver's Kunai
~ Health gain only occurs with backstab
+ Increased speed of health gain to 140/s
- Increased overheal decay to 2x as fast
A combination of the former changes in conjunction should make the overheal still very useful but less immediately intense to allow brute forcing stabs, while requiring more active stabs to keep up your health.

The Spy-cicle
~ No longer melts in contact with fire to provide fire/afterburn resistance
+ Press RELOAD to melt knife and remove debuffs, melting knife for 15 seconds
+ Knife melting swaps to your revolver by default
- On backstab: knife melts for 7 seconds
- Added 50% holster penalty
The intent with this version is to be less purely punishing to pyro and providing the disposable knife a more general protection from debuffs to avoid being tracked. In exchange he loses the ability to chainstab and must be more considerate with stabs.