Panic Attack
+ Changed: press Alt-Fire to dump current clip with 33% faster firing speed
+ Reduced damage penalty to 15%
+ Added 15% accuracy bonus
Intent is to increase the range at which the shotgun's close range effectiveness is strengthened, making it a proper side-grade to the stock shotgun. The sneeze-gun mode was also made more flexible to make use of.

Third Degree
+ Increased health on hit to 20 HP
Trying to give the on-hit benefit more immediately beneficial, especially against linked targets.

Sharpened Volcano Fragment
+ Increased fire damage vulnerability on marked targets to 25%
+ Removed firing speed penalty
- Removed health on kill
- Added 35% slower deploy speed
Trying to focus the weapons usage on combing it with your other weapons while also being less clunky

The Eyelander
+ Removed scaling shield recharge penalty on kill
- Added 20% slower shield recharge rate
The scaling downside seemed antithetical to the idea of snowballing with heads gained, so instead the shield recharge penalty was reduced and made static, to consistently counterbalance the growing shield damage and speed without being too punishing.

Loch-n-Load
+ Reduced reload speed penalty to 35%
Reload speed seemed to slow in spite of being done all at once.

Spy Attributes
+ Decreased base time to cloak to 0.75s
+ Decreased base time to decloak to 1.5s
- Reverted base cloak duration to 10s
- Reverted Max Health to 125
From the last feedback session, it communicated that giving a flat HP increase wouldn't be enough to improve spy's survivability to make him more consistent, given the slower use of his tools. These buffs intend to make cloaking in and out of situations more reliable, allowing the spy to evade conflict more easily and strike without being caught out too soon.

Revolvers
+ Bullet spread is reset gradually over 1 second
The purpose of this universal change is to make Spy's self-defense options more viable when he attempts to keep his distance.

The Ambassador
+ Headshots between 1200 to 1800 HU will have damage gradually reduced to normal
This buff makes for a smoother loss in damage over range with the ambassador, so it's not immediately cut off of damage when the spy attempts to make a pick at a more convenient distance.

Conniver's Kunai
  Max health penalty reduced to -30 to match reduced base health
+ Reverted health gain to be instantaneous
- Health gained from victim is based on half their current health
The purpose of this is to make the spy less immediately weakened when making their first stab, but requires the spy to make multiple stabs more necessary in order to maintain peak health while still allowing the spy to gain enough to escape.

Big Earner
+ Reduced max health penalty to -15 from -25
The starting health penalty crossed a few too many thresholds to make it too inconsistent before making that first stab.

Syringe Guns
+ Reloads while holstered, at a rate of 10 syringes per second
+ Speeds up recovery rate of injured teammates on hit, increasing healing with Mediguns
  Each syringe reduces Crit Heal timer of target by 4 seconds, playing a distinct sound on hit and when target is at max heal rate
This new syringe functionality is meant to provide a non-intrusive way of competing with the Crossbow by better enabling your Medigun but without providing a buff to ubers and throwing off those times. It also aims to lessen the busywork of tracking crit heals of teammates and giving the medic more control of their healing. With a passive reload, the medic can also more easily spare firing syringes between healing targets.